---
layout: post
title: "Workshop on Deep Learning: Systems, Algorithms and Applications"
---
{% include JB/setup %}

##Time & Venue

16 September 2015 @ COM1, School of Computing, NUS


## Registration
Please [fill this form](https://docs.google.com/forms/d/1TI8_81nG93Wvwe84KE07LPKM-DTtL5-9C-hY5Zuh8QY/viewform) to register the workshop.


## Schedule

|Speaker| Title|Time|
|-------|------|----|
|Dr. Qirong Ho, I2R| Petuum: A New Platform for Distributed Machine Learning on Big Data|TBD|
|Asst. Prof. Yue Zhang, SUTD |Deep Learning for Stock Market Prediction|TBD|

## Details

### Petuum: A New Platform for Distributed Machine Learning on Big Data

**Abstract**:
What is a systematic way to efficiently apply a wide spectrum of advanced ML
programs to industrial scale problems, using Big Models (up to 100s of billions
of parameters) on Big Data (up to terabytes or petabytes)? Modern
parallelization strategies employ fine-grained operations and scheduling beyond
the classic bulk-synchronous processing paradigm popularized by MapReduce, or
even specialized graph-based execution that relies on graph representations of
ML programs. The variety of approaches tends to pull systems and algorithms
design in different directions, and it remains difficult to find a universal
platform applicable to a wide range of ML programs at scale. We propose a
general-purpose framework, Petuum, that systematically addresses data- and
model-parallel challenges in large-scale ML, by observing that many ML programs
are fundamentally optimization-centric and admit error-tolerant,
iterative-convergent algorithmic solutions. This presents unique opportunities
for an integrative system design, such as bounded-error network synchronization
and dynamic scheduling based on ML program structure. We demonstrate the
efficacy of these system designs versus well-known implementations of modern
ML algorithms, showing that Petuum allows ML programs to run in much less
time and at considerably larger model sizes, even on modestly-sized compute
clusters.

**Biography**:
Dr. Qirong Ho is a scientist at the Institute for Infocomm Research, A\*STAR,
Singapore, and an adjunct assistant professor at the Singapore Management
University School of Information Systems. His primary research focus is
distributed cluster software systems for Machine Learning at Big Data scales,
with a view towards correctness and performance guarantees. In addition, Dr. Ho
has performed research on statistical models for large-scale network analysis
--- particularly latent space models for visualization, community detection,
user personalization and interest prediction --- as well as social media
analysis on hyperlinked documents with text and network data. Dr. Ho received
his PhD in 2014, under Eric P. Xing at Carnegie Mellon University's Machine
Learning Department. He is a recipient of the Singapore A*STAR National Science
Search Undergraduate and PhD fellowships, and is a recipient of the SIGKDD 2015
Doctoral Dissertation Award.



### Deep Learning for Stock Market Prediction
**Abstract**:
It has been shown that news events influ- ence the trends of stock price
movements. However, previous work on news-driven stock market prediction
rely on shallow features (such as bags-of-words, named entities and noun
phrases), which do not capture structured entity-relation informa- tion,
and hence cannot represent complete and exact events. Recent advances in
Open Information Extraction (Open IE) techniques enable the extraction of
struc- tured events from web-scale data. We propose to adapt Open IE
technology for event-based stock price movement pre- diction, extracting
structured events from large-scale public news without manual efforts.
Both linear and nonlinear mod- els are employed to empirically investigate
the hidden and complex relationships be- tween events and the stock
market. Large- scale experiments show that our event-based system out-
performs bags-of-words-based baselines, and previously reported systems
trained on S&P 500 stock historical data. We further use deep learning to
improve the representation of event for enhanced generalization, and to
capture the influence of long-term and short-term historical events
simultaneously. These techniques boost the accuracy of index prediction
from 60% to 66%, and significantly enhance the accuracy of individual
stock prediction.


**Biography**:
Yue Zhang is currently an assistant professor at Singapore University of
Technology and Design. Before joining SUTD in July 2012, he worked as a
postdoctoral research associate in University of Cambridge, UK. Yue Zhang
received his DPhil and MSc degrees from University of Oxford, UK, and his
BEng degree from Tsinghua University, China. His research interests
include natural language processing, machine learning and artificial
Intelligence. He has been working on statistical parsing, parsing, text
synthesis, machine translation, sentiment analysis and stock market
analysis intensively. Yue Zhang serves as the reviewer for top journals
such as Computational Linguistics, Transaction of Association of
Computational Linguistics and Journal of Artificial Intelligence Research.
He is also PC member for conferences such as ACL, COLING, EMNLP, NAACL,
EACL, AAAI and IJCAI. Recently, he was the area chairs of CLING 2014,
NAACL 2015 and EMNLP 2015.

## Co-Sponsors
